.. index:: Release notes; 3.0

.. _releases-3.0:

===============================================================
PortableApps.com Launcher 3.0 release notes - UNDER DEVELOPMENT
===============================================================

Coming after 2.1, 3.0 is being developed with `more new features`_, `some
changes`_, `a bug fix`_ and further improved documentation. It's never been
easier to make a high quality portable app.

.. _`more new features`: `New features`_
.. _`some changes`: `Changes`_
.. _`a bug fix`: `Bugs fixed`_

New features
============

New hook for custom code
------------------------

Three new hooks have been added which allows custom code to execute immediately
after the completion of the execution of the app, before all the standard
segments' ``Post`` hooks are executed (which does things like moving files
back, saving registry data and cleaning up some other things): ``PostExec``,
``PostExecPrimary`` and ``PostExecSecondary``. If you don't *know* that you
need this, you probably don't. See :ref:`Segments: Hooks <segments-hooks>` for
a little bit more information.

Run additional commands before or after the main program
--------------------------------------------------------

:ini-key:`[Launch]:RunBeforeN` and :ini-key:`[Launch]:RunAfterN` have been
added, providing a way to execute commands just before and just after the main
program's execution. These are useful for apps which need to (or can) do some
special setup or cleanup of their own to improve portability. Refer to the
linked documentation for further information.

:ini-key:`[LanguageFile]:TrimLeft`
----------------------------------

:ini-key:`[LanguageFile]:TrimLeft` has been added, the counterpart of
:ini-key:`[LanguageFile]:TrimRight` for trimming the start of a read string.

Save the language easily
------------------------

The new options :ini-key:`[LanguageFile]:SaveAs` and
:ini-key:`[Language]:Save` can be used instead of :ini-section:`[FileWriteN]`
for the most common cases in order to save the custom language when using
:ini-section:`[LanguageFile]` or working only with environment variables (e.g.
``LANG``).

New environment variables
-------------------------

Lots of new environment variables were added, like :env:`PAL:AppID`, a
:ref:`ref-launcher.ini` counterpart to ``$AppID`` in
:ref:`custom code <custom-code>`.

Another environment variable, :env:`PAL:Bits`, can be used for different
configurations on 32-bit and 64-bit machines. Its value defaults to ``32``
when running on a 32-bit machine or ``64`` when running on a 64-bit machine.
The values which will be taken can be configured in
:ini-key:`[Launch]:BitsVariable32` and :ini-key:`[Launch]:BitsVariable64`.
For :ref:`custom code <custom-code>`, there is ``$Bits``, which is ``64`` or
``32``. It is not affected by :ini-key:`[Launch]:BitsVariable32` or
:ini-key:`[Launch]:BitsVariable64`.

:env:`PAL:DrivePath` and :env:`PAL:LastDrivePath` contains another form of the
current and previous drives, this time with a path separator in the end.

The environment variables :env:`PAL:LastAppDirectory`,
:env:`PAL:LastDataDirectory`, :env:`PAL:LastPortableAppsDirectory`,
:env:`PAL:LastPortableApps.comDocumentsDirectory`,
:env:`PAL:LastPortableApps.comPicturesDirectory`,
:env:`PAL:LastPortableApps.comMusicDirectory`
and :env:`PAL:LastPortableApps.comVideosDirectory` hold the values of
:env:`PAL:AppDir`, :env:`PAL:DataDir`, :env:`PAL:PortableAppsDir`,
:env:`PortableApps.comDocuments`, :env:`PortableApps.comPictures`,
:env:`PortableApps.comMusic` and :env:`PortableApps.comVideos` from the last
execution of the app.

Persist variables between launches
----------------------------------

A new section, :ini-section:`[LastRunEnvironment]`, has been introduced. It
allows you to save arbitrary content, thus you can refer to it in the next
launch. This is useful when you need to e.g. know the value of
:env:`%PAL:LastDrive% <PAL:LastDrive>` from the previous run.

New catch-all find/replace
--------------------------

Two new :ini-key:`[FileWriteN]:Type`\ ``s`` were added: ``ReplaceAll`` and
``ReplaceCommon``. Both can be used to automatically perform the most common
path updates: app and data directories, plus drive path. Additionally,
``ReplaceAll`` also updates several platform-level directories, like the paths
to documents and to other portable apps.

Ghostscript support
-------------------

Turn on :ini-key:`[Activate]:Ghostscript` and your launcher will now get the
appropriate Ghostscript environment variables added and the Ghostscript
directory added to the ``PATH``.

Apps like the GIMP, Inkscape, Scribus and XnView can all now take advantage of
this.

Support for managed code applications
-------------------------------------

The launcher can now detect the presence of any .NET Framework version before
trying to execute the program. If an application depends on the .NET Framework,
you just need to set the value ``[Dependencies]:UsesDotNetVersion`` in
:ref:`appinfo.ini <paf-appinfo>` to the version required by the application.

Changes
=======

Directory variables
-------------------

Now you can define environment variables as
:ref:`directory variables <ref-envsub-directory>` by appending a ``~`` (tilde)
to the key name. This way, you will get the same additional variables as the
built-in ones.

Currently, :ini-section:`[Environment]` and :ini-section:`[LastRunEnvironment]`
support this feature. Refer to their documentation for details.

Environment variable parsing on :ini-key:`[Launch]:ProgramExecutable`
---------------------------------------------------------------------

:ini-key:`[Launch]:ProgramExecutable` and
:ini-key:`[Launch]:ProgramExecutableWhenParameters` now have environment
variables parsed. This allows the use of :env:`%PAL:Bits% <PAL:Bits>` instead of
the -64 variants, :ini-key:`[Launch]:ProgramExecutable64` and
:ini-key:`[Launch]:ProgramExecutableWhenParameters64`.

Mutex-based starting/stopping checks
------------------------------------

The starting/stopping checks introduced in 2.1 were switched from using a
RuntimeData INI file to using mutexes. This change allows system-wide blocking
of apps in those phases, where the current one is installation-wide, i.e. it
will not work if you run the same app from different directories.

Renamed language environment variables
--------------------------------------

The language environment variables were renamed in order to fix a conflict with
the PortableApps.com Platform. The following tables lists their new names:

============================= =================
Old name                      New name
============================= =================
PortableApps.comLanguageCode  PAL:LanguageCode
PortableApps.comLocaleCode2   PAL:LanguageCode2
PortableApps.comLocaleCode3   PAL:LanguageCode3
PortableApps.comLocaleGlibc   PAL:LanguageGlibc
PortableApps.comLocaleWinName PAL:LanguageNSIS
PortableApps.comLocaleName    PAL:LanguageName
PortableApps.comLocaleID      PAL:LanguageLCID
============================= =================

The PortableApps.com Launcher Generator will automatically change your code to
use the new environment variables.

Dealing with default values with :ini-section:`[RegistryValueBackupDelete]`
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Due to an oversight, the :ini-section:`[RegistryValueBackupDelete]` section
couldn't cope with the default value (while :ini-section:`[RegistryValueWrite]`
could). This omission has now been amended.

Bugs fixed
==========

Additional command-line parameters with runtime privilege elevation
-------------------------------------------------------------------

On Windows Vista and later, when the :ini-key:`[Launch]:RunAsAdmin` options were
enabled, two extra command-line parameters were added to the program's arguments.
Those extra arguments could confuse some apps and are now removed from the
command-line.
